# RPDFG

![The Report PDF Generator, short RPDFG, Logo shows a PDF logo in front of legacy printer
output](RPDFG_Logo.png "The RPDFG logo was generated by ChatGPT. It shows a PDF logo in
front of legacy printer output.")

The IBM programming language "RPG", the "Report Program Generator", ist used to create
PDF documents, so the name "R-PDF-G".

## Why?

Because the onboad utilities create PDF documents that look rather ugly. At least that's
what people said when we had to switch back from a commercial solution to the tools IBM
provides.

So i wanted to come up with a tool that could convert our rather simple SCS spooled files
to still simple, but decent looking PDF documents. In the future, one might want to
create a PDF file in the first place instead of a spooled file, so i created a service
program with functions that can be called by any program, not just the first "customer",
the RPDFGCVT command, that converts a spooled file to PDF.

And why RPG? Because it is the established programming language on the IBM i and i don't
have the drawbacks of using a different language, like python or nodejs, which not only
would require a runtime, that had to be installed by someone else (Dev is not Ops!) and
would be way more difficult to maintain. Let alone that we have limited knowledge in this
unknown territory and fear the dangers. So it's way easier for me to just use RPG,
although i agree that it is perhaps not the best language for this task.

## Prerequisites

Your system shouldn't have system value QCCSID set to 65535. If it is, you have to change
your job's CCSID to something else to run this tool; best guess is the "default ccsid"
which is derived of your 5250 workstation device.

## RPDFGCVT - Convert a spooled file to PDF

This command is able to convert SCS spooled files to PDF documents. No support for
overlays, just the text contents of the spooled file.

```CLLE
RPDFGCVT FILE(QSYSPRT) JOB(*) SPLNBR(*LAST) PDFFILE('QSYSPRT.pdf')
```

## useful literature

- [Wikipedia](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Document_Format)

- useful, some chapters are a bit too academic for me, don't let them frighten you:
[PDF Reference 1.4](https://opensource.adobe.com/dc-acrobat-sdk-docs/pdfstandards/pdfreference1.4.pdf)

You might notice that is rather hard to find something useful about the PDF format
because you end up with a lot documentation about everything, just being published in the
pdf format. That's where AI does a pretty good job when i ask for free easy to comprehend
documentation:

- [pdfsyntax.dev](https://pdfsyntax.dev/introduction_pdf_syntax.html)
- [apryse.com/blog](https://apryse.com/blog/pdf-structure-creation)

One can also use ChatGPT to check pdf files.
